The Art of Doing Science and Engineering
The Art of Doing Science and
Engineering
Learning to Learn
Richard W.Hamming
U.S. Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, California
GORDON AND BREACH SCIENCE PUBLISHERS
Australia • Canada • China • France • Germany • India •
Japan • Luxembourg • Malaysia • The Netherlands •
Russia • Singapore • Switzerland • Thailand •
United Kingdom
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to
www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
Copyright © 1997 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association)
Amsterdam B.V.Published in The Netherlands under license
by Gordon and Breach Science Publishers.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage
or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Printed in India.
Amsteldijk 166
1st Floor
1079 LH Amsterdam
The Netherlands
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Hamming, R.W. (Richard Wesley), 1915–
The art of doing science and engineering: learning to
learn
1. Science 2. Engineering
I. Title
500
ISBN 0-203-45071-X Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-45913-X (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 90-5699-501-4 (Print Edition)
CONTENTS
Preface vi
Introduction viii
1 Orientation 1
2 Foundations of the Digital (Discrete) Revolution 9
3 History of Computer—Hardware 17
4 History of Computer—Software 24
5 History of Computer Applications 33
6 Limits of Computer Applications—AI—I 40
7 Limits of Computer Applications—AI—II 47
8 Limits of Computer Applications—AI—III 55
9 n-Dimensional Space 57
10 Coding Theory—I 67
11 Coding Theory—II 74
12 Error Correcting Codes 81
13 Information Theory 89
14 Digital Filters—I 97
15 Digital Filters—II 107
16 Digital Filters—III 115
17 Digital Filters—IV 123
18 Simulation—I 128
19 Simulation—II 135
20 Simulation—III 141
21 Fiber Optics 151
22 Computer Aided Instruction—CAI 157
v
23 Mathematics 163
24 Quantum Mechanics 171
25 Creativity 176
26 Experts 181
27 Unreliable Data 187
28 Systems Engineering 195
29 You Get What You Measure 202
30 You and Your Research 209
Index 216
PREFACE
After many years of pressure and encouragement from friends, I decided to write up the graduate course in
engineering I teach at the U.S.Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California. At first I concentrated on
all the details I thought should be tightened up, rather than leave the material as a series of somewhat
disconnected lectures. In class the lectures often followed the interests of the students, and many of the later
lectures were suggested topics in which they expressed an interest Also, the lectures changed from year to
year as various areas developed. Since engineering depends so heavily these days on the corresponding
sciences, I often use the terms interchangeably.
After more thought I decided that since I was trying to teach “style” of thinking in science and
engineering, and “style” is an art, I should therefore copy the methods of teaching used for the other arts—
once the fundamentals have been learned. How to be a great painter cannot be taught in words; one learns
by trying many different approaches that seem to surround the subject. Art teachers usually let the advanced
student paint, and then make suggestions on how they would have done it, or what might also be tried, more
or less as the points arise in the student’s head—which is where the learning is supposed to occur! In this
series of lectures I try to communicate to students what cannot be said in words—the essence of style in
science and engineering. I have adopted a loose organization with some repetition since this often occurs in
the lectures. There are, therefore, digressions and stories—with some told in two different places—all in the
somewhat rambling, informal style typical of lectures.
I have used the “story” approach, often emphasizing the initial part of the discovery, because I firmly
believe in Pasteur’s remark, “Luck favors the prepared mind.” In this way I can illustrate how the
individual’s preparation before encountering the problem can often lead to recognition, formulation, and
solution. Great results in science and engineering are “bunched” in the same person too often for success to
be a matter of random luck.
Teachers should prepare the student for the student’s future, not for the teacher’s past. Most teachers
rarely discuss the important topic of the future of their field, and when this is pointed out they usually reply:
“No one can know the future.” It seems to me the difficulty of knowing the future does not absolve the
teacher from seriously trying to help the student to be ready for it when it comes. It is obvious the
experience of an individual is not necessarily that of a class of individuals; therefore, any one person’s
projection into the future is apt to be somewhat personal and will not be universally accepted. This does not
justify reverting to impersonal surveys and losing the impact of the personal story.
Since my classes are almost all carefully selected navy, marine, army, air force, and coast guard students
with very few civilians, and, interestingly enough, about 15% very highly selected foreign military, the
students face a highly technical future—hence the importance of preparing them for their future and not just
our past.
vii
The year 2020 seems a convenient date to center the preparation for their future—a sort of 20/20
foresight, as it were. As graduate students working toward a master’s degree, they have the basics well in
hand. That leaves me the task of adding “style” to their education, which in practice is usually the difference
between an average person and a great one. The school has allowed me great latitude in trying to teach a
completely non-technical course; this course “complements” the more technical ones. As a result, my
opening words, occasionally repeated, are: “There is really no technical content in the course, though I will,
of course, refer to a great deal of it, and hopefully it will generally be a good review of the fundamentals of
what you have learned. Do not think it is the content of the course—it is only illustrative material. Style of
thinking is the center of the course.”
The subtitle of this book, Learning to Learn, is the main solution I offer to help students cope with the
rapid changes they will have to endure in their fields. The course centers around how to look at and think
about knowledge, and it supplies some historical perspectives that might be useful.
This course is mainly personal experiences I have had and digested, at least to some extent. Naturally one
tends to remember one’s successes and forget lesser events, but I recount a number of my spectacular
failures as clear examples of what to avoid. I have found that the personal story is far, far more effective
than the impersonal one; hence there is necessarily an aura of “bragging” in the book that is unavoidable.
Let me repeat what I earlier indicated. Apparently an “art”— which almost by definition cannot be put
into words—is probably best communicated by approaching it from many sides and doing so repeatedly,
hoping thereby students will finally master enough of the art, or if you wish, style, to significantly increase
their future contributions to society. A totally different description of the course is: it covers all kinds of
things that could not find their proper place in the standard curriculum.
The casual reader should not be put off by the mathematics; it is only “window dressing” used to
illustrate and connect up with earlier learned material. Usually the underlying ideas can be grasped from the
words alone.
It is customary to thank various people and institutions for help in producing a book. Thanks obviously
go to AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey, and to the U.S.Naval Postgraduate School,
especially the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, for making this book possible.
INTRODUCTION
This book is concerned more with the future and less with the past of science and engineering. Of course
future predictions are uncertain and usually based on the past; but the past is also much more uncertain—or
even falsely reported—than is usually recognized. Thus we are forced to imagine what the future will
probably be. This course has been called"Hamming on Hamming" since it draws heavily on my own past
experiences, observations, and wide reading.
There is a great deal of mathematics in the early part because almost surely the future of science and
engineering will be more mathematical than the past, and also I need to establish the nature of the
foundations of our beliefs and their uncertainties. Only then can I show the weaknesses of our current
beliefs and indicate future directions to be considered.
If you find the mathematics difficult, skip those early parts. Later sections will be understandable
provided you are willing to forgo the deep insights mathematics gives into the weaknesses of our current
beliefs. General results are always stated in words, so the content will still be there but in a slightly diluted
form.
1 Orientation
The purpose of this course is to prepare you for your technical future. There is really no technical content in
the course, though I will, of course, refer to a great deal of it, and hopefully it will generally be a good
review of the fundamentals you have learned. Do not think the technical content is the course—it is only
illustrative material. Style of thinking is the center of the course. I am concerned with educating and not
training you.
I will examine, criticize, and display styles of thinking. To illustrate the points of style I will often use
technical knowledge most of you know, but, again, it will be, I hope, in the form of a useful review which
concentrates on the fundamentals. You should regard this as a course which complements the many
technical courses you have learned. Many of the things I will talk about are things which I believe you ought
to know but which simply do not fit into courses in the standard curriculum. The course exists because the
department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of the Naval Postgraduate School recognizes the need
for both a general education and the specialized technical training your future demands.
The course is concerned with “style”, and almost by definition style cannot be taught in the normal
manner by using words. I can only approach the topic through particular examples, which I hope are well
within your grasp, though the examples come mainly from my 30 years in the mathematics department of
the Research Division of Bell Telephone Laboratories (before it was broken up). It also comes from years
of study of the work of others.
The belief anything can be “talked about” in words was certainly held by the early Greek philosophers,
Socrates (469–399), Plato (427–347), and Aristotle (384–322). This attitude ignored the current mystery
cults of the time who asserted you had to “experience” some things which could not be communicated in
words. Examples might be the gods, truth, justice, the arts, beauty, and love. Your scientific training has
emphasized the role of words, along with a strong belief in reductionism, hence to emphasize the possible
limitations of language I shall take up the topic in several places in the book. I have already said “style” is
such a topic.
I have found to be effective in this course, I must use mainly first hand knowledge, which implies I break
a standard taboo and talk about myself in the first person, instead of the traditional impersonal way of
science. You must forgive me in this matter, as there seems to be no other approach which will be as
effective. If I do not use direct experience then the material will probably sound to you like merely pious
words and have little impact on your minds, and it is your minds I must change if I am to be effective.
This talking about first person experiences will give a flavor of “bragging”, though I include a number of
my serious errors to partially balance things. Vicarious learning from the experiences of others saves
making errors yourself, but I regard the study of successes as being basically more important than the study
of failures. As I will several times say, there are so many ways of being wrong and so few of being right,
2 CHAPTER 1
studying successes is more efficient, and furthermore when your turn comes you will know how to succeed
rather than how to fail!
I am, as it were, only a coach. I cannot run the mile for you; at best I can discuss styles and criticize
yours. You know you must run the mile if the athletics course is to be of benefit to you—hence you must
think carefully about what you hear or read in this book if it is to be effective in changing you—which must
obviously be the purpose of any course. Again, you will get out of this course only as much as you put in,
and if you put in little effort beyond sitting in the class or reading the book, then it is simply a waste of your
time. You must also mull things over, compare what I say with your own experiences, talk with others, and
make some of the points part of your way of doing things.
Since the subject matter is “style”, I will use the comparison with teaching painting. Having learned the
fundamentals of painting, you then study under a master you accept as being a great painter; but you know
you must forge your own style out of the elements of various earlier painters plus your native abilities. You
must also adapt your style to fit the future, since merely copying the past will not be enough if you aspire to
future greatness—a matter I assume, and will talk about often in the book. I will show you my style as best I
can, but, again, you must take those elements of it which seem to fit you, and you must finally create your
own style. Either you will be a leader, or a follower, and my goal is for you to be a leader. You cannot
adopt every trait I discuss in what I have observed in myself and others; you must select and adapt, and
make them your own if the course is to be effective.
Even more difficult than what to select is that what is a successful style in one age may not be appropriate
to the next age! My predecessors at Bell Telephone Laboratories used one style; four of us who came in all
at about the same time, and had about the same chronological age, found our own styles and as a result we
rather completely transformed the overall style of the Mathematics Department, as well as many parts of the
whole Laboratories. We privately called ourselves “The four young Turks”, and many years later I found
top management had called us the same!
I return to the topic of education. You all recognize there is a significant difference between education
and training.
Education is what, when, and why to do things, Training is how to do it.
Either one without the other is not of much use. You need to know both what to do and how to do it. I have
already compared mental and physical training and said to a great extent in both you get out of it what you
put into it—all the coach can do is suggest styles and criticize a bit now and then. Because of the usual size
of these classes, or because you are reading the book, there can be little direct criticism of your thinking by
me, and you simply have to do it internally and between yourselves in conversations, and apply the things I
say to your own experiences. You might think education should precede training, but the kind of educating I
am trying to do must be based on your past experiences and technical knowledge. Hence this inversion of
what might seem to be reasonable. In a real sense I am engaged in “meta-education”, the topic of the course
is education itself and hence our discussions must rise above it—“meta-education”, just as metaphysics was
supposed to be above physics in Aristotle’s time (actually “follow”, “transcend” is the translation of
“meta”).
This book is aimed at your future, and we must examine what is likely to be the state of technology
(Science and Engineering) at the time of your greatest contributions. It is well known that since about Isaac
Newton’s time (1642–1727) knowledge of the type we are concerned with has about doubled every 17
years. First, this may be measured by the books published (a classic observation is libraries must double
their holdings every 17 years if they are to maintain their relative position). Second, when I went to Bell
ORIENTATION 3
Telephone Laboratories in 1946 they were trying to decrease the size of the staff from WW-II size down to
about 5500. Yet during the 30 years I was there I observed a fairly steady doubling of the number of
employees every 17 years, regardless of the administration having hiring freezes now and then, and such
things. Third, the growth of the number of scientists generally has similarly been exponential, and it is said
currently almost 90% of the scientists who ever lived are now alive! It is hard to believe in your future there
will be a dramatic decrease in these expected rates of growth, hence you face, even more than I did, the
constant need to learn new things.
Here I make a digression to illustrate what is often called “back of the envelop calculations”. I have
frequently observed great scientists and engineers do this much more often than “the run of the mill”
people, hence it requires illustration. I will take the above two statements, knowledge doubles every 17
years, and 90% of the scientists who ever lived are now alive, and ask to what extent they are compatible.
The model of the growth of knowledge and the growth of scientists assumed are both exponential, with the
growth of knowledge being proportional to the number of scientists alive. We begin by assuming the
number scientists at any time t is
and the amount of knowledge produced annually has a constant k of proportionality to the number of
scientists alive. Assuming we begin at minus infinity in time (the error is small and you can adjust it to
Newton’s time if you wish), we have the formula
hence we know b. Now to the other statement. If we allow the lifetime of a scientist to be 55 years (it seems
likely that the statement meant living and not practicing, but excluding childhood) then we have
which is very close to 90%.
Typically the first back of the envelop calculations use, as we did, definite numbers where one has a feel
for things, and then we repeat the calculations with parameters so you can adjust things to fit the data better
and understand the general case. Let the doubling period be D, and the lifetime of a scientist be L. The first
equation now becomes
and the second becomes:
4 CHAPTER 1
With D=17 years we have 17×3.3219=56.47…years for the lifetime of a scientist, which is close to the 55
we assumed. We can play with ratio of L/D until we find a slightly closer fit to the data (which was
approximate, though I believe more in the 17 years for doubling than I do in the 90%). Back of the envelop
computing indicates the two remarks are reasonably compatible. Notice the relationship applies for all time
so long as the assumed simple relationships hold.
The reason back of the envelop calculations are widely used by great scientists is clearly revealed—you
get a good feeling for the truth or falsity of what was claimed, as well as realize which factors you were
inclined not to think about, such as exactly what was meant by the lifetime of a scientist. Having done the
calculation you are much more likely to retain the results in your mind. Furthermore, such calculations keep
the ability to model situations fresh and ready for more important applications as they arise. Thus I
recommend when you hear quantitative remarks such as the above you turn to a quick modeling to see if
you believe what is being said, especially when given in the public media like the press and TV. Very often
you find what is being said is nonsense, either no definite statement is made which you can model, or if you
can set up the model then the results of the model do not agree with what was said. I found it very valuable
at the physics table I used to eat with; I sometimes cleared up misconceptions at the time they were being
formed, thus advancing matters significantly.
Added to the problem of the growth of new knowledge is the obsolescence of old knowledge. It is
claimed by many the half-life of the technical knowledge you just learned in school is about 15 years—in 15
years half of it will be obsolete (either we have gone in other directions or have replaced it with new
material). For example, having taught myself a bit about vacuum tubes (because at Bell Telephone
Laboratories they were at that time obviously important) I soon found myself helping, in the form of
computing, the development of transistors—which obsoleted my just learned knowledge!
To bring the meaning of this doubling down to your own life, suppose you have a child when you are x
years old. That child will face, when it is in college, about y times the amount you faced.
y x
factor of increase years
2 17
3 27
4 34
5 39
6 44
7 48
8 51
This doubling is not just in theorems of mathematics and technical results, but in musical recordings of
Beethoven’s Ninth, of where to go skiing, of TV programs to watch or not to watch. If you were at times awed
by the mass of knowledge you faced when you went to college, or even now, think of your children’s
troubles when they are there! The technical knowledge involved in your life will quadruple in 34 years, and
many of you will then be near the high point of your career. Pick your estimated years to retirement and
then look in the left-hand column for the probable factor of increase over the present current knowledge
when you finally quit!
What is my answer to this dilemma? One answer is you must concentrate on fundamentals, at least what
you think at the time are fundamentals, and also develop the ability to learn new fields of knowledge when
ORIENTATION 5
they arise so you will not be left behind, as so many good engineers are in the long run. In the position I
found myself in at the Laboratories, where I was the only one locally who seemed (at least to me) to have a
firm grasp on computing, I was forced to learn numerical analysis, computers, pretty much all of the
physical sciences at least enough to cope with the many different computing problems which arose and whose
solution could benefit the Labs, as well as a lot of the social and some the biological sciences. Thus I am a
veteran of learning enough to get along without at the same time devoting all my effort to learning new
topics and thereby not contributing my share to the total effort of the organization. The early days of
learning had to be done while I was developing and running a computing center. You will face similar
problems in your career as it progresses, and, at times, face problems which seem to overwhelm you.
How are you to recognize “fundamentals”? One test is they have lasted a long time. Another test is from
the fundamentals all the rest of the field can be derived by using the standard methods in the field.
I need to discuss science vs. engineering. Put glibly:
In science if you know what you are doing you should not be doing it.
In engineering if you do not know what you are doing you should not be doing it.
Of course, you seldom, if ever, see either pure state. All of engineering involves some creativity to cover the
parts not known, and almost all of science includes some practical engineering to translate the abstractions
into practice. Much of present science rests on engineering tools, and as time goes on, engineering seems to
involve more and more of the science part. Many of the large scientific projects involve very serious
engineering problems—the two fields are growing together! Among other reasons for this situation is almost
surely we are going forward at an accelerated pace, and now there is not time to allow us the leisure which
comes from separating the two fields. Furthermore, both the science and the engineering you will need for
your future will more and more often be created after you left school. Sorry! But you will simply have to
actively master on your own the many new emerging fields as they arise, without having the luxury of being
passively taught.
It should be noted that engineering is not just applied science, which is a distinct third field (though it is
not often recognized as such) which lies between science and engineering.
I read somewhere there are 76 different methods of predicting the future—but very number suggests there
is no reliable method which is widely accepted. The most trivial method is to predict tomorrow will be
exactly the same as today—which at times is a good bet. The next level of sophistication is to use the current
rates of change and to suppose they will stay the same—linear prediction in the variable used. Which variable
you use can, of course, strongly affect the prediction made! Both methods are not much good for long-term
predictions, however.
History is often used as a long-term guide; some people believe history repeats itself and others believe
exactly the opposite! It is obvious:
The past was once the future and the future will become the past.
In any case I will often use history as a background for the extrapolations I make. I believe the best
predictions are based on understanding the fundamental forces involved, and this is what I depend on
mainly. Often it is not physical limitations which control but rather it is human made laws, habits, and
organizational rules, regulations, personal egos, and inertia, which dominate the evolution to the future. You
have not been trained along these lines as much as I believe you should have been, and hence I must be careful
to include them whenever the topics arise.
6 CHAPTER 1
There is a saying,“Short term predictions are always optimistic and long term predictions are always
pessimistic”. The reason, so it is claimed, the second part is true is for most people the geometric growth
due to the compounding of knowledge is hard to grasp. For example for money a mere 6% annual growth
doubles the money in about 12 years! In 48 years the growth is a factor of 16. An example of the truth of
this claim that most long-term predictions are low is the growth of the computer field in speed, in density of
components, in drop in price, etc. as well as the spread of computers into the many corners of life. But the
field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) provides a very good counter example. Almost all the leaders in the field
made long-term predictions which have almost never come true, and are not likely to do so within your
lifetime, though many will in the fullness of time.
I shall use history as a guide many times in spite of Henry Ford, Sr. saying, “History is Bunk”. Probably
Ford’s points were:
1. History is seldom reported at all accurately, and I have found no two reports of what happened at Los
Alamos during WW-II seems to agree.
2. Due to the pace of progress the future is rather disconnected from the past; the presence of the modern
computer is an example of the great differences which have arisen.
Reading some historians you get the impression the past was determined by big trends, but you also have
the feeling the future has great possibilities. You can handle this apparent contradiction in at least four ways:
1. You can simply ignore it.
2. You can admit it.
3. You can decide the past was a lot less determined than historians usually indicate and individual
choices can make large differences at times. Alexander the Great, Napoleon, and Hitler had great
effects on the physical side of life, while Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Newton, Maxwell, and Einstein
are examples on the mental side.
4. You can decide the future is less open ended than you would like to believe, and there is really less
choice than there appears to be.
It is probable the future will be more limited by the slow evolution of the human animal and the
corresponding human laws, social institution, and organizations than it will be by the rapid evolution of
technology.
In spite of the difficulty of predicting the future and that:
Unforeseen technological inventions can completely upset the most careful predictions,
you must try to foresee the future you will face. To illustrate the importance of this point of trying to foresee
the future I often use a standard story.
It is well known the drunken sailor who staggers to the left or right with n independent random steps will,
on the average, end up about steps from the origin. But if there is a pretty girl in one direction, then his
steps will tend to go in that direction and he will go a distance proportional to n. In a lifetime of many, many
independent choices, small and large, a career with a vision will get you a distance proportional to n, while
no vision will get you only the distance In a sense, the main difference between those who go far and
those who do not is some people have a vision and the others do not and therefore can only react to the
current events as they happen.
ORIENTATION 7
One of the main tasks of this course is to start you on the path of creating in some detail your vision of
your future. If I fail in this I fail in the whole course. You will probably object that if you try to get a vision
now it is likely to be wrong—and my reply is from observation I have seen the accuracy of the vision
matters less than you might suppose, getting anywhere is better than drifting, there are potentially many
paths to greatness for you, and just which path you go on, so long as it takes you to greatness, is none of my
business. You must, as in the case of forging your personal style, find your vision of your future career, and
then follow it as best you can.
No vision, not much of a future.
To what extent history does or does not repeat itself is a moot question. But it is one of the few guides you
have, hence history will often play a large role in my discussions—I am trying to provide you with some
perspective as a possible guide to create your vision of your future. The other main tool I have used is an
active imagination in trying to see what will happen. For many years I devoted about 10% of my time
(Friday afternoons) to trying to understand what would happen in the future of computing, both as a
scientific tool and as shaper of the social world of work and play. In forming your plan for your future you
need to distinguish three different questions:
What is possible?
What is likely to happen?
What is desirable to have happen?
In a sense the first is Science—what is possible. The second in Engineering—what are the human factors
which chose the one future that does happen from the ensemble of all possible futures. The third, is ethics,
morals, or what ever other word you wish to apply to value judgments. It is important to examine all three
questions, and in so far as the second differs from the third, you will probably have an idea of how to alter
things to make the more desirable future occur, rather than let the inevitable happen and suffer the
consequences. Again, you can see why having a vision is what tends to separate the leaders from the
followers.
The standard process of organizing knowledge by departments, and subdepartments, and further breaking
it up into separate courses, tends to conceal the homogeneity of knowledge, and at the same time to omit
much which falls between the courses. The optimization of the individual courses in turn means a lot of
important things in Engineering practice are skipped since they do not appear to be essential to any one
course. One of the functions of this book is to mention and illustrate many of these missed topics which are
important in the practice of Science and Engineering. Another goal of the course is to show the essential
unity of all knowledge rather than the fragments which appear as the individual topics are taught. In your
future anything and everything you know might be useful, but if you believe the problem is in one area you
are not apt to use information that is relevant but which occurred in another course.
The course will center around computers. It is not merely because I spent much of my career in Computer
Science and Engineering, rather it seems to me computers will dominate your technical lives. I will repeat a
number of times in the book the following facts: Computers when compared to Humans have the
advantages:
Economics Speed —far, far faster
—far cheaper, and getting more so
8 CHAPTER 1
Accuracy —far more accurate (precise)
Reliability Rapidity of control —far ahead (many have error correction built into them)
—many current airplanes are unstable
Freedom from boredom Bandwidth in and out Ease of retraining Hostile environments Personnel problems and require rapid computer control to make them practical
—an overwhelming advantage
—again overwhelming
—change programs, not unlearn and then learn the new thing consuming hours and hours of
human time and effort
—outer space, underwater, high radiation fields, warfare, manufacturing situations that are
unhealthful, etc.
—they tend to dominate management of humans but not of machines; with machines there
are no pensions, personal squabbles, unions, personal leave, egos, deaths of relatives,
recreation, etc.
I need not list the advantages of humans over computers—almost every one of you has already objected to
this list and has in your mind started to cite the advantages on the other side.
Lastly, in a sense, this is a religious course—I am preaching the message that, with apparently only one
life to live on this earth, you ought to try to make significant contributions to humanity rather than just get
along through life comfortably—that the life of trying to achieve excellence in some area is in itself a
worthy goal for your life. It has often been observed the true gain is in the struggle and not in the
achievement—a life without a struggle on your part to make yourself excellent is hardly a life worth living.
This, it must be observed, is an opinion and not a fact, but it is based on observing many people’s lives and
speculating on their total happiness rather than the moment to moment pleasures they enjoyed. Again, this
opinion of their happiness must be my own interpretation as no one can know another’s life. Many reports
by people who have written about the “good life” agree with the above opinion. Notice I leave it to you to
pick your goals of excellence, but claim only a life without such a goal is not really living but it is merely
existing—in my opinion. In ancient Greece Socrates (469–399) said:
The unexamined life is not worth living.
2
Foundations of the Digital (Discrete)
We are approaching the end of the revolution of going from signaling with continuous signals to signaling
with discrete pulses, and we are now probably moving from using pulses to using solitons as the basis for
our discrete signaling. Many signals occur in Nature in a continuous form (if you disregard the apparent
discrete structure of things built out of molecules and electrons). Telephone voice transmission, musical
sounds, heights and weights of people, distance covered, velocities, densities, etc. are examples of
continuous signals. At present we usually convert the continuous signal almost immediately to a sampled
discrete signal; the sampling being usually at equally spaced intervals in time and the amount of the signal
being quantized to a comparatively few levels. Quantization is a topic we will ignore in these chapters,
though it is important in some situations, especially in large scale computations with numbers.
Why has this revolution happened?
1. In continuous signaling (transmission) you often have to amplify the signal to compensate for natural
losses along the way. Any error made at one stage, before or during amplification, is naturally amplified by
the next stage. For example, the telephone company in sending a voice across the continent might have a
total amplification factor of 10120. At first 10120 seems to be very large so we do a quick back of the envelop
modeling to see if it is reasonable. Consider the system in more detail. Suppose each amplifier has a gain of
100, and they are spaced every 50 miles. The actual path of the signal may well be over 3000 miles, hence
some 60 amplifiers, hence the above factor does seem reasonable now we have seen how it can arise. It
should be evident such amplifiers had to be built with exquisite accuracy if the system was to be suitable for
human use.
Compare this to discrete signaling. At each stage we do not amplify the signal, but rather we use the
incoming pulse to gate, or not, a standard source of pulses; we actually use repeaters, not amplifiers. Noise
introduced at one spot, if not too much to make the pulse detection wrong at the next repeater, is
automatically removed. Thus with remarkable fidelity we can transmit a voice signal if we use digital
signaling, and furthermore the equipment need not be built extremely accurately. We can use, if necessary,
error detecting and error correcting codes to further defeat the noise. We will examine these codes later,
Chapters 10–12. Along with this we have developed the area of digital filters which are often much more
versatile, compact, and cheaper than are analog filters, Chapters 14–17. We should note here transmission
through space (typically signaling) is the same as transmission through time (storage).
Digital computers can take advantage of these features and carry out very deep and accurate
computations which are beyond the reach of analog computation. Analog computers have probably passed
their peak of importance, but should not be dismissed lightly. They have some features which, so long as
great accuracy or deep computations are not required, make them ideal in some situations.
2. The invention and development of transistors and the integrated circuits, ICs, has greatly helped the
digital revolution. Before ICs the problem of soldered joints dominated the building of a large computer,
10 CHAPTER 2
and ICs did away with most of this problem, though soldered joints are still troublesome. Furthermore, the
high density of components in an IC means lower cost and higher speeds of computing (the parts must be
close to each other since otherwise the time of transmission of signals will significantly slow down the
speed of computation). The steady decrease of both the voltage and current levels has contributed to the
partial solving of heat dissipation.
It was estimated in 1992 that interconnection costs were approximately:
Interconnection on the chip $10–5=0.001 cent
Interchip $10–2=1 cent
Interboard $10–1=10 cents
Interframe $100=100 cents
3. Society is steadily moving from a material goods society to an information service society. At the time of
the American Revolution, say 1780 or so, over 90% of the people were essentially farmers—now farmers
are a very small percent of workers. Similarly, before WW-II most workers were in factories—now less
than half are there. In 1993, there were more people in Government (excluding the military), than there
were in manufacturing! What will the situation be in 2020? As a guess I would say less than 25% of the
people in the civilian work force will be handling things, the rest will be handling information in some form
or other. In making a movie or a TV program you are making not so much a thing, though of course it does
have a material form, as you are organizing information. Information is, of course, stored in a material
form, say a book (the essence of a book is information), but information is not a material good to be consumed
like food, a house, clothes, an automobile, or an airplane ride for transportation.
The information revolution arises from the above three items plus their synergistic interaction, though the
following items also contribute.
4. The computers make it possible for robots to do many things, including much of the present
manufacturing. Evidently computers will play a dominant role in robot operation, though one must
be careful not to claim the standard von Neumann type of computer will be the sole control mechanism,
rather probably the current neural net computers, fuzzy set logic, and variations will do much of the control.
Setting aside the child’s view of a robot as a machine resembling a human, but rather thinking of it as a
device for handling and controlling things in the material world, robots used in manufacturing do the
following:
A. Produce a better product under tighter control limits.
B. Produce usually a cheaper product.
C. Produce a different product.
This last point needs careful emphasis.
When we first passed from hand accounting to machine accounting we found it necessary, for
economical reasons if no other, to somewhat alter the accounting system. Similarly, when we passed from
strict hand fabrication to machine fabrication we passed from mainly screws and bolts to rivets and
welding.
It has rarely proved practical to produce exactly the same product by machines as we produced by
hand.
FOUNDATIONS OF THE DIGITAL (DISCRETE) REVOLUTION 11
Indeed, one of the major items in the conversion from hand to machine production is the imaginative
redesign of an equivalent product. Thus in thinking of mechanizing a large organization, it won’t work if
you try to keep things in detail exactly the same, rather there must be a larger give-and-take if there is to be
a significant success. You must get the essentials of the job in mind and then design the mechanization to do
that job rather than trying to mechanize the current version—if you want a significant success in the long
run.
I need to stress this point; mechanization requires you produce an equivalent product, not identically the
same one. Furthermore, in any design it is now essential to consider field maintenance since in the long run
it often dominates all other costs. The more complex the designed system the more field maintenance must
be central to the final design. Only when field maintenance is part of the original design can it be safely
controlled; it is not wise to try to graft it on later. This applies to both mechanical things and to human
organizations.
5. The effects of computers on Science have been very large, and will probably continue as time goes on.
My first experience in large scale computing was in the design of the original atomic bomb at Los Alamos.
There was no possibility of a small scale experiment either you have a critical mass or you do not—and
hence computing seemed at that time to be the only practical approach. We simulated, on primitive IBM
accounting machines, various proposed designs, and they gradually came down to a design to test in the
desert at Alamagordo, NM.
From that one experience, on thinking it over carefully and what it meant, I realized computers would
allow the simulation of many different kinds of experiments. I put that vision into practice at Bell
Telephone Laboratories for many years. Somewhere in the mid-tolate 1950s in an address to the President
and V.Ps of Bell Telephone Laboratories I said, “At present we are doing 1 out of 10 experiments on the
computers and 9 in the labs, but before I leave it will be 9 out of 10 on the machines”. They did not believe
me then, as they were sure real observations were the key to experiments and I was just a wild theoretician
from the mathematics department, but you all realize by now we do somewhere between 90 % to 99 % of
our experiments on the machines and the rest in the labs. And this trend will go on! It is so much cheaper to
do simulations than real experiments, so much more flexible in testing, and we can even do things which
cannot be done in any lab, that it is inevitable the trend will continue for some time. Again, the product was
changed!
But you were all taught about the evils of the Middle Age scholasticism—people deciding what would
happen by reading in the books of Aristotle (384–322) rather than looking at Nature. This was Galileo’s
(1564–1642) great point which started the modern scientific revolution—look at Nature not in books! But what
was I saying above? We are now looking more and more in books and less and less at Nature! There is
clearly a risk we will go too far occasionally—and I expect this will happen frequently in the future. We must
not forget, in all the enthusiasm for computer simulations, occasionally we must look at Nature as She is.
6. Computers have also greatly affected Engineering. Not only can we design and build far more complex
things than we could by hand, we can explore many more alternate designs. We also now use computers to
control situations such as on the modern high speed airplane where we build unstable designs and then use
high speed detection and computers to stabilize them since the unaided pilot simply cannot fly them directly.
Similarly, we can now do unstable experiments in the laboratories using a fast computer to control the
instability. The result will be that the experiment will measure something very accurately right on the edge
of stability.
As noted above, Engineering is coming closer to Science, and hence the role of simulation in unexplored
situations is rapidly increasing in Engineering as well as Science. It is also true computers are now often an
essential component of a good design.
12 CHAPTER 2
In the past Engineering has been dominated to a great extent by “what can we do”, but now “what do we
want to do” looms greater since we now have the power to design almost anything we want. More than ever
before, Engineering is a matter of choice and balance rather than just doing what can be done. And more
and more it is the human factors which will determine good design—a topic which needs your serious
attention at all times.
7. The effects on society are also large. The most obvious illustration is computers have given top
management the power to micromanage their organization, and top management has shown little or no
ability to resist using this power. You can regularly read in the papers some big corporation is
decentralizing, but when you follow it for several years you see they merely intended to do so, but did not.
Among other evils of micromanagement is lower management does not get the chance to make
responsible decisions and learn from their mistakes, but rather because the older people finally retire then
lower management finds itself as top management —without having had many real experiences in
management!
Furthermore, central planning has been repeatedly shown to give poor results (consider the Russian
experiment for example or our own bureaucracy). The persons on the spot usually have better knowledge
than can those at the top and hence can often (not always) make better decisions if things are not
micromanaged. The people at the bottom do not have the larger, global view, but at the top they do not have
the local view of all the details, many of which can often be very important, so either extreme gets poor
results.
